=pod

=head1 NAME

B<rwbagbuild> - Create a binary Bag from non-flow data.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  rwbagbuild { --set-input=SETFILE | --bag-input=TEXTFILE }
        [--delimiter=C] [--default-count=DEFAULTCOUNT]
        [--key-type=FIELD_TYPE] [--counter-type=FIELD_TYPE]
        [--note-add=TEXT] [--note-file-add=FILE]
        [--compression-method=COMP_METHOD] [--output-path=OUTPUTFILE]

  rwbagbuild --help

  rwbagbuild --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<rwbagbuild> builds a binary Bag file from an IPset file or from
textual input.

When creating a Bag from an IPset, the value associated with each IP
address is the value given by the B<--default-count> switch, or 1 if
the switch isn't provided.

The textual input read from the argument to the B<--bag-input> switch
is processed a line at a time.  Comments begin with a 'C<#>'-character
and continue to the end of the line; they are stripped from each line.
Any line that is blank or contains only whitespace is ignored.  All
other lines must contain a valid key or key-count pair; whitespace
around the key and count is ignored.

If the delimiter character (specified by the B<--delimiter> switch and
having pipe ('C<|>') as its default) is not present, the line must
contain only an IP address or an integer key.  If the delimiter is
present, the line must contain an IP address or integer key before the
delimiter and an integer count after the delimiter.  These lines may
have a second delimiter after the integer count; the second delimiter
and any text to the right of it are ignored.

When the B<--default-count> switch is specified, its value is used as
the count for each key, and the count value parsed from each line, if
any, is ignored.  Otherwise, the parsed count is used, or 1 is used as
the count if no delimiter was present.

For each key-count pair, the key is inserted into Bag with its count
or, if the key is already present in the Bag, its total count is be
incremented by the count from this line.  When using the
B<--default-count> switch, the count for a key that appears in the
input I<N> times is the product of I<N> and I<DEFAULTCOUNT>.

The IP address or integer key must be expressed in one of the
following formats.  B<rwbagbuild> complains if the key field contains
a mixture of IPv6 addresses and integer values.

=over 4

=item *

Dotted decimal---all 4 octets are required:

 10.1.2.4

=item *

An unsigned 32-bit integer:

 167838212

=item *

An IPv6 address in canonical form (when SiLK has been compiled with
IPv6 support):

 2001:db8:a:1::2:4
 ::ffff:10.1.2.4

=item *

Any of the above with a CIDR designation---for dotted decimal all
four octets are still required:

 10.1.2.4/31
 167838212/31
 2001:db8:a:1::2:4/127
 ::ffff:10.1.2.4/31

=item *

SiLK IP wildcard notation.  A SiLK IP Wildcard can represent multiple
IPv4 or IPv6 addresses.  An IP Wildcard contains an IP in its
canonical form, except each part of the IP (where I<part> is an octet
for IPv4 or a hexadectet for IPv6) may be a single value, a range, a
comma separated list of values and ranges, or the letter C<x> to
signify all values for that part of the IP (that is, C<0-255> for
IPv4).  You may not specify a CIDR suffix when using the IP Wildcard
notation.

 10.x.1-2.4,5
 2001:db8:a:x::1-2:4,5

=back

If an IP address or count cannot be parsed, or if a line contains a
delimiter character but no count, B<rwbagbuild> prints an error and
exits.

=head1 OPTIONS

Option names may be abbreviated if the abbreviation is unique or is an
exact match for an option.  A parameter to an option may be specified
as B<--arg>=I<param> or S<B<--arg> I<param>>, though the first form is
required for options that take optional parameters.

The following two switches control the type of input; one and
only one must be provided:

=over 4

=item B<--set-input>=I<SETFILE>

Create a Bag from an IPset.  I<SETFILE> is a filename, a named pipe,
or the keyword C<stdin> or C<-> to read the IPset from the standard
input.  Counts have a volume of 1 when the B<--default-count> switch
is not specified.  (IPsets are typically created by B<rwset(1)> or
B<rwsetbuild(1)>.)

=item B<--bag-input>=I<TEXTFILE>

Create a Bag from a delimited text file.  I<TEXTFILE> is a filename, a
named pipe, or the keyword C<stdin> or C<-> to read the text from the
standard input.  See the L</DESCRIPTION> section for the syntax of the
I<TEXTFILE>.

=item B<--delimiter>=I<C>

The delimiter to expect between each key-count pair of the I<TEXTFILE>
read by the B<--bag-input> switch.  The default delimiter is the
vertical pipe ('C<|>').  The delimiter is ignored if the
B<--set-input> switch is specified.  When the delimiter is a
whitespace character, any amount of whitespace may surround and
separate the key and counter.  Since 'C<#>' is used to denote comments
and newline is used to denote records, neither is a valid delimiter
character.

=item B<--default-count>=I<DEFAULTCOUNT>

Override the counts of all values in the input text or IPset with the
value of I<DEFAULTCOUNT>.  I<DEFAULTCOUNT> must be a positive integer.

=item B<--key-type>=I<FIELD_TYPE>

Write a entry into the header of the Bag file that specifies the key
contains I<FIELD_TYPE> values.  When this switch is not specified, the
key type of the Bag is set to C<custom>.  The I<FIELD_TYPE> is case
insensitive.  The supported I<FIELD_TYPE>s are:

=over 4

=item sIPv4

source IP address, IPv4 only

=item dIPv4

destination IP address, IPv4 only

=item sPort

source port

=item dPort

destination port

=item protocol

IP protocol

=item packets

packets, see also C<sum-packets>

=item bytes

bytes, see also C<sum-bytes>

=item flags

bitwise OR of TCP flags

=item sTime

starting time of the flow record, seconds resolution

=item duration

duration of the flow record, seconds resolution

=item eTime

ending time of the flow record, seconds resolution

=item sensor

sensor ID

=item input

SNMP input

=item output

SNMP output

=item nhIPv4

next hop IP address, IPv4 only

=item initialFlags

TCP flags on first packet in the flow

=item sessionFlags

bitwise OR of TCP flags on all packets in the flow except the first

=item attributes

flow attributes set by the flow generator

=item application

guess as to the content of the flow, as set by the flow generator

=item class

class of the sensor

=item type

type of the sensor

=item icmpTypeCode

an encoded version of the ICMP type and code, where the type is in the
upper byte and the code is in the lower byte

=item sIPv6

source IP, IPv6

=item dIPv6

destination IP, IPv6

=item nhIPv6

next hop IP, IPv6

=item records

count of flows

=item sum-packets

sum of packet counts

=item sum-bytes

sum of byte counts

=item sum-duration

sum of duration values

=item any-IPv4

a generic IPv4 address

=item any-IPv6

a generic IPv6 address

=item any-port

a generic port

=item any-snmp

a generic SNMP value

=item any-time

a generic time value, in seconds resolution

=item custom

a number

=back

=item B<--counter-type>=I<FIELD_TYPE>

Write a entry into the header of the Bag file that specifies the
counter contains I<FIELD_TYPE> values.  When this switch is not
specified, the counter type of the Bag is set to C<custom>.  The
supported I<FIELD_TYPE>s are the same as those for the key.

=item B<--note-add>=I<TEXT>

Add the specified I<TEXT> to the header of the output file as an
annotation.  This switch may be repeated to add multiple annotations
to a file.  To view the annotations, use the B<rwfileinfo(1)> tool.

=item B<--note-file-add>=I<FILENAME>

Open I<FILENAME> and add the contents of that file to the header of
the output file as an annotation.    This switch may be repeated to
add multiple annotations.  Currently the application makes no effort
to ensure that I<FILENAME> contains text; be careful that you do not
attempt to add a SiLK data file as an annotation.

=item B<--compression-method>=I<COMP_METHOD>

Specify how to compress the output.  When this switch is not given,
output to the standard output or to named pipes is not compressed, and
output to files is compressed using the default chosen when SiLK was
compiled.  The valid values for I<COMP_METHOD> are determined by which
external libraries were found when SiLK was compiled.  To see the
available compression methods and the default method, use the
B<--help> or B<--version> switch.  SiLK can support the following
I<COMP_METHOD> values when the required libraries are available.

=over 4

=item none

Do not compress the output using an external library.

=item zlib

Use the B<zlib(3)> library for compressing the output, and always
compress the output regardless of the destination.  Using zlib
produces the smallest output files at the cost of speed.

=item lzo1x

Use the I<lzo1x> algorithm from the LZO real time compression library
for compression, and always compress the output regardless of the
destination.  This compression provides good compression with less
memory and CPU overhead.

=item best

Use lzo1x if available, otherwise use zlib.  Only compress the output
when writing to a file.

=back

=item B<--output-path>=I<OUTPUTFILE>

Redirect output to I<OUTPUTFILE>.  I<OUTPUTFILE> is a filename, a
named pipe, or the keyword C<stdout> or C<-> to write the bag to the
standard output.

=item B<--help>

Print the available options and exit.

=item B<--version>

Print the version number and information about how SiLK was
configured, then exit the application.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

In the following examples, the dollar sign (C<$>) represents the shell
prompt.  The text after the dollar sign represents the command line.
Lines have been wrapped for improved readability, and the back slash
(C<\>) is used to indicate a wrapped line.

=head2 Create a bag with IP addresses as keys from a text file

Assume the file F<mybag.txt> contains the following lines, where each
line contains an IP address, a comma as a delimiter, a count, and ends
with a newline.

 192.168.0.1,5
 192.168.0.2,500
 192.168.0.3,3
 192.168.0.4,14
 192.168.0.5,5

To build a bag with it:

 $ rwbagbuild --bag-input=mybag.txt --delimiter=, > mybag.bag

Use B<rwbagcat(1)> to view its contents:

 $ rwbagcat mybag.bag
     192.168.0.1|                   5|
     192.168.0.2|                 500|
     192.168.0.3|                   3|
     192.168.0.4|                  14|
     192.168.0.5|                   5|

=head2 Create a bag with protocols as keys from a text file

To create a Bag of protocol data from the text file F<myproto.txt>:

   1|      4|
   6|    138|
  17|    131|

use

 $ rwbagbuild --key-type=proto --bag-input=myproto.txt > myproto.bag
 $ rwbagcat myproto.bag
          1|                   4|
          6|                 138|
         17|                 131|

When the B<--key-type> switch is specified, B<rwbagcat> knows the keys
should be printed as integers, and B<rwfileinfo(1)> shows the type of
the key:

 $ rwfileinfo --fields=bag myproto.bag
 myproto.bag:
   bag            key: protocol @ 4 octets; counter: custom @ 8 octets

Without the B<--key-type> switch, B<rwbagbuild> assumes the integers
in F<myproto.txt> represent IP addresses:

 $ rwbagbuild --bag-input=myproto.txt | rwbagcat
         0.0.0.1|                   4|
         0.0.0.6|                 138|
        0.0.0.17|                 131|

Although the B<--integer-keys> switch on B<rwbagcat> forces it to
print keys as integers, it is generally better to use the
B<--key-type> switch when creating the bag.

$ rwbagbuild --bag-input=myproto.txt | rwbagcat --integer-keys
         1|                   4|
         6|                 138|
        17|                 131|

=head2 Create a bag and override the existing counter

To ignore the counts that exist in F<myproto.txt> and set the counts
for each protocol to 1, use the B<--default-count> switch which
overrides the existing value:

 $ rwbagbuild --key-type=protocol --bag-input=myproto.txt  \
        --default-count=1 --output-path=myproto1.bag
 $ rwbagcat myproto1.bag
          1|                   1|
          6|                   1|
         17|                   1|

=head2 Create a bag with IP addresses as keys from an IPset file

Given the IP set F<myset.set>, create a bag where every entry in the
bag has a count of 3:

 $ rwbagbuild --set-input=myset.set --default-count=3  \
        --out=mybag2.bag

=head2 Create a bag from multiple input files

Suppose we have three IPset files, F<A.set>, F<B.set>, and F<C.set>:

 $ rwsetcat A.set
 10.0.0.1
 10.0.0.2
 $ rwsetcat B.set
 10.0.0.2
 10.0.0.3
 $ rwsetcat C.set
 10.0.0.1
 10.0.0.2
 10.0.0.4

We want to create a bag file from these IPset files where the count
for each IP address is the number of files that IP appears in.
B<rwbagbuild> accepts a single file as an argument, so we cannot do
the following:

 $ rwbagbuild --set-input=A.set --set-input=B.set ...   # WRONG!

(Even if we could repeat the B<--set-input> switch, specifying it
multiple times would be annoying if we had 300 files instead of only
3.)

The IPset files are (mathematical) sets, so if we join them together
first with B<rwsettool(1)> and then run B<rwbagbuild>, each IP address
gets a count of 1:

 $ rwsettool --union A.set B.set C.set   \
   | rwbagbuild --set-input=-            \
   | rwbagcat
        10.0.0.1|                   1|
        10.0.0.2|                   1|
        10.0.0.3|                   1|
        10.0.0.4|                   1|

When B<rwbagbuild> is processing textual input, it sums the counters
for keys that appear in the input multiple times.  We can use
B<rwsetcat(1)> to convert each IPset file to text and feed that as
single textual stream to B<rwbagbuild>.  Use the B<--cidr-blocks>
switch on B<rwsetcat> to reduce the amount of input that B<rwbagbuild>
must process.  This is probably the best approach to the problem:

 $ rwsetcat --cidr-block *.set | rwbagbuild --bag-input=- > total1.bag
 $ rwbagcat total1.bag
        10.0.0.1|                   2|
        10.0.0.2|                   3|
        10.0.0.3|                   1|
        10.0.0.4|                   1|

A less efficient solution is to convert each IPset to a bag and then
use B<rwbagtool(1)> to add the bags together:

 $ for i in *.set ; do
        rwbagbuild --set-input=$i --output-file=/tmp/$i.bag ;
   done
 $ rwbagtool --add /tmp/*.set.bag > total2.bag
 $ rm /tmp/*.set.bag

There is no need to create a bag file for each IPset; we can get by
with only two bag files, the final bag file, F<total3.bag>, and a
temporary file, F<tmp.bag>.  We initialize F<total3.bag> to an empty
bag.  As we loop over each IPset, B<rwbagbuild> converts the IPset to
a bag on its standard output, B<rwbagtool> creates F<tmp.bag> by
adding its standard input to F<total3.bag>, and we rename F<tmp.bag>
to F<total3.bag>:

 $ rwbagbuild --bag-input=/dev/null --output-file=total3.bag
 $ for i in *.set ; do
        rwbagbuild --set-input=$i  \
        | rwbagtool --output-file=tmp.bag --add total3.bag stdin ;
        /bin/mv tmp.bag total3.bag ;
   done
 $ rwbagcat total3.bag
        10.0.0.1|                   2|
        10.0.0.2|                   3|
        10.0.0.3|                   1|
        10.0.0.4|                   1|

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item SILK_CLOBBER

The SiLK tools normally refuse to overwrite existing files.  Setting
SILK_CLOBBER to a non-empty value removes this restriction.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rwbag(1)>, B<rwbagcat(1)>, B<rwbagtool(1)>, B<rwfileinfo(1)>,
B<rwset(1)>, B<rwsetbuild(1)>, B<rwsetcat(1)>, B<rwsettool(1)>,
B<silk(7)>, B<zlib(3)>

=head1 BUGS

The B<--default-count> switch is poorly named.

=cut

$SiLK: rwbagbuild.pod 2c4a776c4249 2015-09-25 16:45:22Z mthomas $

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
End:
