=pod

=head1 NAME

B<rwswapbytes> - Convert the byte order of a SiLK Flow file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  rwswapbytes
        {--big-endian|--little-endian|--native-endian|--swap-endian}
        [--note-add=TEXT] [--note-file-add=FILE]
        INPUT_FILE OUTPUT_FILE

  rwswapbytes --help

  rwswapbytes --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Change the byte order of I<INPUT_FILE> as specified by the option and
write the result to I<OUTPUT_FILE>.  B<rwswapbytes> will read the
input from the standard input if you use the string C<stdin> for
I<INPUT_FILE>; swapbytes will write the output to the standard output
if you use the string C<stdout> for I<OUTPUT_FILE>.  B<rwswapbytes>
knows how to read and write compressed (B<gzip(1)>ped) files.

=head1 OPTIONS

Option names may be abbreviated if the abbreviation is unique or is an
exact match for an option.  A parameter to an option may be specified
as B<--arg>=I<param> or B<--arg> I<param>, though the first form is
required for options that take optional parameters.

One of these switches must be provided:

=over 4

=item B<--big-endian>

Write the output-file in big-endian (network byte-order) format.

=item B<--little-endian>

Write the output-file in little-endian format.

=item B<--native-endian>

Write the output-file in this machine's native format.

=item B<--swap-endian>

Unconditionally swap the byte-order of the input-file.

=item B<--help>

Print the available options and exit.

=item B<--version>

Print the version number and information about how SiLK was
configured, then exit the application.

=back

These switches are optional:

=over 4

=item B<--note-add>=I<TEXT>

Add the specified I<TEXT> to the header of the output file as an
annotation.  This switch may be repeated to add multiple annotations
to a file.  To view the annotations, use the B<rwfileinfo(1)> tool.

=item B<--note-file-add>=I<FILENAME>

Open I<FILENAME> and add the contents of that file to the header of
the output file as an annotation.    This switch may be repeated to
add multiple annotations.  Currently the application makes no effort
to ensure that I<FILENAME> contains text; be careful that you do not
attempt to add a SiLK data file as an annotation.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rwfileinfo(1)>, B<silk(7)>, B<gzip(1)>

=cut

$SiLK: rwswapbytes.pod 9e71f5672f24 2013-03-05 23:37:50Z mthomas $

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
End:
