=pod

=head1 NAME

B<rwreceiver> - Accepts files transferred from rwsender(s)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

To listen for incoming connections:

  rwreceiver --mode=server --server-port=[HOST:]PORT
        --client-ident=IDENT [--client-ident=IDENT ...]
        ...

To make outgoing connections:

  rwreceiver --mode=client --server-address=IDENT:HOST:PORT
        [--server-address=IDENT:HOST:PORT ...]
        ...


  rwreceiver  SERVER_MODE_OR_CLIENT_MODE_SWITCHES
        --identifier=IDENT --destination-directory=DIR_PATH
        [--duplicate-destination=DIR_PATH
          [--duplicate-destination=DIR_PATH...] ]
        [--unique-duplicates] [--freespace-minimum=SIZE]
        [--space-maximum-percent=NUM] [--post-command=COMMAND]
        [ --tls-ca=PEM_FILE
          { { --tls-cert=PEM_FILE --tls-key=PEM_FILE }
            | --tls-pkcs12=DER_FILE } ]
        { --log-destination=DESTINATION
          | --log-pathname=FILE_PATH
          | --log-directory=DIR_PATH [--log-basename=LOG_BASENAME]
            [--log-post-rotate=COMMAND] }
        [--log-level=LEVEL] [--log-sysfacility=NUMBER]
        [--pidfile=FILE_PATH] [--no-chdir] [--no-daemon]

  rwreceiver --help

  rwreceiver --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<rwreceiver> is a daemon which accepts files transferred from one or
more B<rwsender(8)> processes.  The received files are stored in a
destination directory.

B<rwreceiver> creates multiple copies of the files it receives when
one or more B<--duplicate-destination> switches are specified.  If
possible, the duplicate file is created as a reference (a hard link)
to the original file.  The B<--unique-duplicates> switch tells
B<rwreceiver> not to use hard links and forces B<rwreceiver> to create
an individual copy of the file in each duplicate destination
directory.  Failure to create a file in any of the duplicate
destination directories is noted in B<rwreceiver>'s log but it is not
treated as a failure to transfer the file.  Only when a file cannot be
created in the destination-directory does B<rwreceiver> consider the
transfer as failed.

The B<--post-command> switch tells B<rwreceiver> to execute a command
on each file that it successfully receives after the file has been
written to the destination directory and copied to each duplicate
destination directory.  The command may include a placeholder which
B<rwreceiver> fills with the path to the file in the destination
directory.  The exit status of the command is ignored by
B<rwreceiver>.  Any output on C<stdout> or C<stderr> from I<COMMAND>
normally appears in the log when the log messages are being written to
a local log file.  See also the B<rwpollexec(8)> daemon.

=head2 Interaction with B<rwsender>

Either B<rwsender> or B<rwreceiver> may act as the B<server> with the
other acting as the B<client>.  That is, an B<rwsender> server may
listen for connections from B<rwreceiver> clients, or an B<rwsender>
client may attempt to connect to one or more B<rwreceiver> servers.

In addition, each B<rwsender> and B<rwreceiver> is configured with an
identifier of its own and the identifier(s) of the B<rwreceiver>(s) or
B<rwsender>(s) that may connect to it.  The connection is closed if
the identifier provided by other process is not recognized.

Every B<rwsender> that communicates with the same B<rwreceiver> must
have a unique identifier; likewise, every B<rwreceiver> that
communicates with the same B<rwsender> must have a unique identifier.
Ideally, the identifier should provide some information about where
the B<rwsender> or B<rwreceiver> program is running and what sort of
data it is transferring.

=head2 Disk Usage

By default, if the disk that B<rwreceiver> writes to becomes full,
B<rwreceiver> prints a message to the log file and exits.

To prevent this, specify the B<--freespace-minimum> and/or
B<--space-maximum-percent> switches, which cause B<rwreceiver> to
monitor its disk usage.  These switches were added in SiLK 3.6.

If receiving a file from an B<rwsender> process would violate the
limits specified in those switches, B<rwreceiver> closes the
connection to that B<rwsender>.  This causes the connection to be
reestablished, and B<rwsender> tries to transfer the file again.  If
the filesystem is still full, B<rwreceiver> closes the connection
again.  After a delay, the connection is reestablished.  This loop is
repeated until the file is successfully transferred.  The delay
between each retry starts at five seconds and grows in five second
increments to a maximum of one minute.

When monitoring its disk usage, B<rwreceiver> accounts for one copy of
the number of bytes in the file.  B<rwreceiver> does not account for
the filesystem overhead associated with creating a file, and it does
not consider the space required to create multiple copies of the file
(cf., B<--duplicate-destination>).

=head2 File Creation

The following describes the process B<rwreceiver> uses when creating a
file it receives from B<rwsender>.  Administrators may find this
information useful when configuring other software to work with
B<rwreceiver>.

=over 4

=item 1

B<rwsender> sends the name of the file, the size of the file, and the
file's permission bits to B<rwreceiver>.

=item 2

If a file with that name already exists in B<rwreceiver>'s destination
directory, B<rwreceiver> checks the file's on-disk size.  If the size
is 0 and no other B<rwreceiver> thread is currently handling that
file, B<rwreceiver> assumes it is an aborted attempt to send the file,
and B<rwreceiver> removes the existing file.  Otherwise, B<rwreceiver>
tells B<rwsender> that the name represents a duplicate file, at which
point B<rwsender> moves the file to its error directory.

=item 3

When neither B<--freespace-minimum> nor B<--space-maximum-percent> is
specified, processing moves to the next step.  Otherwise,
B<rwreceiver> verifies that there is space on the filesystem to hold
one copy of the file.  As described in the L</Disk Usage> section
above, B<rwreceiver> delays processing the file until space is
available.

=item 4

B<rwreceiver> creates a 0-length placeholder file having the name of
the file being transferred, and B<rwreceiver> closes this file.  The
permission bits on this file are all 0.

=item 5

The B<rwreceiver> process creates a second file whose name consists of
a dot (B<.>) followed by the name of the file being transferred.  The
permission bits on this file are those sent by B<rwsender>.

=item 6

B<rwreceiver> writes the data it receives from B<rwsender> into the
dot file.

=item 7

Once the transfer is complete, B<rwreceiver> closes the dot file.

=item 8

If any duplicate destination directories have been specified,
B<rwreceiver> copies the dot file to each of those directories (using
a hard link if possible).  A failure to copy the file into a duplicate
destination is noted in the log file, but otherwise the error is
ignored.

=item 9

B<rwreceiver> renames the dot file to replace the placeholder file.

=item 10

The B<rwreceiver> process tells the B<rwsender> process that the
transfer was successfully completed.

=item 11

B<rwreceiver> prepares the command specified by the B<--post-command>
switch, perhaps filling in the complete path to the file in the
destination directory, and executes the command.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

Option names may be abbreviated if the abbreviation is unique or is an
exact match for an option.  A parameter to an option may be specified
as B<--arg>=I<param> or B<--arg> I<param>, though the first form is
required for options that take optional parameters.

The following set of switches are required:

=over 4

=item B<--identifier>=I<IDENT>

Use the name I<IDENT> when establishing a connection with an
B<rwsender> process.  The identifier should contain only printable,
non-whitespace characters; the following characters are illegal: colon
(C<:>), slash (C</> and C<\>), period (C<.>), and comma (C<,>).

=item B<--mode>=I<MODE>

Specify how the connection between B<rwsender> and B<rwreceiver>(s)
should be established.  When I<MODE> is B<server>, B<rwreceiver>
listens for connections from B<rwsender> clients; when I<MODE> is
B<client>, B<rwreceiver> attempts to connect to B<rwsender> servers.

=item B<--destination-directory>=I<DIR_PATH>

Place the transferred files into I<DIR_PATH>.  Note that B<rwreceiver>
uses this as its processing directory; see the L</File Creation>
section above for details.

=back

When running in B<server> mode, the following switches are required:

=over 4

=item B<--server-port>=B<[>I<HOST>B<:]>I<PORT>

Listen for incoming B<rwsender> client connections on I<PORT> as
I<HOST>.  If I<HOST> is omitted, B<rwreceiver> listens on any
address.  I<HOST> may be a name or an IP address; when I<HOST> is an
IPv6 address, it must be enclosed in square brackets.

=item B<--client-ident>=I<IDENT>

Allow connections from an B<rwsender> client whose identifier is
I<IDENT>.  This switch may be repeated to allow multiple B<rwsender>
clients to connect.  B<rwreceiver> closes the connection if an
B<rwsender> client connects and does not provide a valid identifier.

=back

When running in B<client> mode, the following switch is required:

=over 4

=item B<--server-address>=I<IDENT>:I<HOST>:I<PORT>

Attempt to connect to the B<rwsender> server listening to port number
I<PORT> on the machine I<HOST>.  B<rwreceiver> closes the connection
unless the B<rwsender> identifies itself as I<IDENT>.  This switch may
be repeated to connect to multiple B<rwsender> servers.  I<HOST> may
be a name or an IP address; when I<HOST> is an IPv6 address, it must
be enclosed in square brackets.

=back

The following switch is optional in both modes:

=over 4

=item B<--post-command>=I<COMMAND>

Run I<COMMAND> on a file once it has been successfully received.  The
following C<%>-conversions are supported in I<COMMAND>: C<%s> is
replaced with the full path of the transferred file in the destination
directory, C<%I> is replaced with the identifier of the B<rwsender>
that sent the file, and C<%%> is replaced with C<%>.  If any other
character follows C<%>, B<rwreceiver> exits with an error.  Note that
I<COMMAND> is only invoked on files in the destination directory;
however, at the time I<COMMAND> is invoked, B<rwreceiver> has
already copied the file into each of the duplicate destination
directories, if any.  See also the B<rwpollexec(8)> daemon.

=back

When SiLK is built with the GnuTLS (Transport Layer Security) library,
the following switches are available.  Using these switches allows
B<rwsender> and B<rwreceiver> to use an encrypted/authenticated
channel for their communication.  Use GnuTLS's B<certtool(1)> program
to create the PEM (Privacy Enhanced Mail) file.

=over 4

=item B<--tls-ca>=I<PEM_FILE>

Set the Certificate Authority file to the given I<PEM_FILE>, thereby
enabling encryption using TLS.  This switch must be used in
conjunction with either the B<--tls-pkcs12> option, or the
B<--tls-cert> and the B<--tls-key> options.  Use B<certtool(1)> to create

=item B<--tls-cert>=I<PEM_FILE>

Set B<rwreceiver>'s encryption certificate for TLS to the given
I<PEM_FILE>.  This switch must be used in conjunction with the
B<--tls-ca> and B<--tls-key> options.

=item B<--tls-key>=I<PEM_FILE>

Set B<rwreceiver>'s encryption key for TLS to the given I<PEM_FILE>.
This switch must be used in conjunction with the B<--tls-ca> and
B<--tls-cert> options.

=item B<--tls-pkcs12>=I<DER_FILE>

Set B<rwreceiver>'s encryption certificate and key for TLS to the
given I<DER_FILE>.  This switch must be used in conjunction with the
B<--tls-ca> option.  B<rwreceiver> uses the value in the
RWRECEIVER_TLS_PASSWORD environment variable to decrypt the PKCS#12
file.  If this variable is not set, B<rwreceiver> assumes the password
is the empty string.

=back

One of the following logging switches is required:

=over 4

=item B<--log-destination>=I<DESTINATION>

Specify the destination where logging messages are written.  When
I<DESTINATION> begins with a slash C</>, it is treated as a file
system path and all log messages are written to that file; there is no
log rotation.  When I<DESTINATION> does not begin with C</>, it must
be one of the following strings:

=over 4

=item C<none>

Messages are not written anywhere.

=item C<stdout>

Messages are written to the standard output.

=item C<stderr>

Messages are written to the standard error.

=item C<syslog>

Messages are written using the B<syslog(3)> facility.

=item C<both>

Messages are written to the syslog facility and to the standard error
(this option is not available on all platforms).

=back

=item B<--log-directory>=I<DIR_PATH>

Use I<DIR_PATH> as the directory where the log files are written.
I<DIR_PATH> must be a complete directory path.  The log files have the
form

 DIR_PATH/LOG_BASENAME-YYYYMMDD.log

where I<YYYYMMDD> is the current date and I<LOG_BASENAME> is the
application name or the value passed to the B<--log-basename> switch
when provided.  The log files are rotated: At midnight local time, a
new log is opened, the previous file is closed, and the command
specified by B<--log-post-rotate> is invoked on the previous day's log
file.  (Old log files are not removed by B<rwreceiver>; the
administrator should use another tool to remove them.)  When this
switch is provided, a process-ID file (PID) is also written in this
directory unless the B<--pidfile> switch is provided.

=item B<--log-pathname>=I<FILE_PATH>

Use I<FILE_PATH> as the complete path to the log file.  The log file
is not rotated.

=back

The following switches are optional:

=over 4

=item B<--duplicate-destination>=I<DIR_PATH>

Create a duplicate of each transferred file in the directory I<DIR_PATH>.
This option may be specified multiple times to create multiple
duplicates.  This duplicate is made by a hard link to the file in the
destination-directory if possible, otherwise a complete copy is made
(see also B<--unique-duplicates>).  If there are errors copying the
file to this directory, the error is logged but the process continues
as if the transfer was successful.  (B<rwreceiver> considers a
transfer as failed only when the file cannot be created in the
destination-directory.)

=item B<--unique-duplicates>

Force the duplicate file created in each duplicate-destination
directory to be a complete copy of the file in the
destination-directory instead of a hard link to the file.  Using hard
links saves disk space and is faster than making a complete copy;
however, any modification-in-place to one file affects all files.
This switch is ignored when the B<--duplicate-destination> switch is
not provided.

=item B<--freespace-minimum>=I<SIZE>

Set the minimum amount free space (in bytes) to maintain on the file
system where the B<--destination-directory> is located.  B<rwreceiver>
delays processing of any file that would cause it to violate this
limit (see L</Disk Usage> above).  The default value of this switch is
0, which tells B<rwreceiver> not to monitor its disk usage.  See also
B<--space-maximum-percent>.

I<SIZE> may be given as an ordinary integer, or as a real number
followed by a suffix C<K>, C<M>, C<G>, or C<T>, which represents the
numerical value multiplied by 1,024 (kilo), 1,048,576 (mega),
1,073,741,824 (giga), and 1,099,511,627,776 (tera), respectively.  For
example, 1.5K represents 1,536 bytes, or one and one-half kilobytes.

=item B<--space-maximum-percent>=I<NUM>

Use no more than this percentage of the file system containing the
B<--destination-directory>.  The default is to use all of the file
system (100%).  B<rwreceiver> delays processing of files that would
cause it to violate this limit.  The I<NUM> parameter does not need to
be an integer.  See also B<--freespace-minimum> and L</Disk Usage>.

=item B<--log-level>=I<LEVEL>

Set the severity of messages that are logged.  The levels from most
severe to least are: C<emerg>, C<alert>, C<crit>, C<err>, C<warning>,
C<notice>, C<info>, C<debug>.  The default is C<info>.

=item B<--log-sysfacility>=I<NUMBER>

Set the facility that B<syslog(3)> uses for logging messages.  This
switch takes a number as an argument.  The default is a value that
corresponds to C<LOG_USER> on the system where B<rwreceiver> is
running.  This switch produces an error unless
B<--log-destination>=syslog is specified.

=item B<--log-basename>=I<LOG_BASENAME>

Use I<LOG_BASENAME> in place of the application name in the name of
I<log> files in the log directory.  See the description of the
B<--log-directory> switch.  This switch does B<not> affect the name of
the process-ID file.

=item B<--log-post-rotate>=I<COMMAND>

Run I<COMMAND> on the previous day's log file after log rotation.
When this switch is not specified, the previous day's log file is
compressed with B<gzip(1)>.  When the switch is specified and
I<COMMAND> is the empty string, no action is taken on the log file.
Each occurrence of the string C<%s> in I<COMMAND> is replaced with the
full path to the log file, and each occurrence of C<%%> is replaced
with C<%>.  If any other character follows C<%>, B<rwreceiver> exits
with an error.  Specifying this switch without also using
B<--log-directory> is an error.

=item B<--pidfile>=I<FILE_PATH>

Set the complete path to the file in which B<rwreceiver> writes its
process ID (PID) when it is running as a daemon.  No PID file is
written when B<--no-daemon> is given.  When this switch is not
present, no PID file is written unless the B<--log-directory> switch
is specified, in which case the PID is written to
F<I<LOGPATH>/rwreceiver.pid>.

=item B<--no-chdir>

Do not change directory to the root directory.  When B<rwreceiver>
becomes a daemon process, it changes its current directory to the root
directory so as to avoid potentially running on a mounted file system.
Specifying B<--no-chdir> prevents this behavior, which may be useful
during debugging.  The application does not change its directory when
B<--no-daemon> is given.

=item B<--no-daemon>

Force B<rwreceiver> to run in the foreground---it does not become a
daemon process.  This may be useful during debugging.

=item B<--help>

Print the available options and exit.

=item B<--version>

Print the version number and information about how SiLK was
configured, then exit the application.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item RWSENDER_TLS_PASSWORD

Specifies the password to use to decrypt the PKCS#12 file specified in
the B<--tls-pkcs12> switch.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rwsender(8)>, B<rwpollexec(8)>, B<silk(7)>, B<syslog(3)>,
B<certtool(1)>, B<gzip(1)>, I<SiLK Installation Handbook>

=cut

$SiLK: rwreceiver.pod 38c3071a03ba 2017-04-26 20:55:19Z mthomas $

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
End:
