=pod

=head1 NAME

B<rwsender> - Watch directory for files and transfer them to rwreceiver(s)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  rwsender --mode=server --server-port=[HOST:]PORT
        --client-ident=IDENT [--client-ident=IDENT ...]
        --identifier=IDENT --incoming-directory=DIR
        [ --tls-ca=PEM_FILE
          { { --tls-cert=PEM_FILE --tls-key=PEM_FILE }
            | --tls-pkcs12=DER_FILE } ]
        --processing-directory=DIR --error-directory=DIR
        [--local-directory=[[IDENT]:]DIR
          [--local-directory=[[IDENT]:]DIR ...]]
        [--unique-local-copies]
        [--filter=IDENT:REGEXP] [--priority=NUM:REGEXP]
        [--polling-interval=NUM] [--block-size=NUM]
        { --log-destination=DESTINATION
          | --log-pathname=FILE_PATH
          | --log-directory=DIR_PATH [--log-basename=LOG_BASENAME]
            [--log-post-rotate=COMMAND] }
        [--log-level=LEVEL] [--log-sysfacility=NUMBER]
        [--pidfile=FILE_PATH] [--no-chdir] [--no-daemon]

  rwsender --mode=client --server-address=IDENT:HOST:PORT
        [--server-address=IDENT:HOST:PORT ...]
        --identifier=IDENT --incoming-directory=DIR
        [ --tls-ca=PEM_FILE
          { { --tls-cert=PEM_FILE --tls-key=PEM_FILE }
            | --tls-pkcs12=DER_FILE } ]
        --processing-directory=DIR --error-directory=DIR
        [--local-directory=[[IDENT]:]DIR
          [--local-directory=[[IDENT]:]DIR ...]]
        [--unique-local-copies]
        [--filter=IDENT:REGEXP] [--priority=NUM:REGEXP]
        [--polling-interval=NUM] [--block-size=NUM]
        { --log-destination=DESTINATION
          | --log-pathname=FILE_PATH
          | --log-directory=DIR_PATH [--log-basename=LOG_BASENAME]
            [--log-post-rotate=COMMAND] }
        [--log-level=LEVEL] [--log-sysfacility=NUMBER]
        [--pidfile=FILE_PATH] [--no-chdir] [--no-daemon]

  rwsender --help

  rwsender --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<rwsender> is a daemon which watches an incoming directory for files.
When files are added, they are moved into a processing directory and
then transferred over the network to one or more B<rwreceiver(8)>
processes.

Any file in the incoming directory whose size is 0 bytes or whose name
begins with a dot C<.> is ignored.

Either B<rwsender> or B<rwreceiver> may act as the B<server> with the
other acting as the B<client>.  That is, an B<rwsender> server may
listen for connections from B<rwreceiver> clients, or an B<rwsender>
client may attempt to connect to one or more B<rwreceiver> servers.

In addition, each B<rwsender> and B<rwreceiver> is configured with an
identifier of its own and the identifier(s) of the B<rwreceiver>(s) or
B<rwsender>(s) that may connect to it.  The connection will not
established if the identifier provided by other process is not
recognized.

Every B<rwsender> that communicates with the same B<rwreceiver> must
have a unique identifier; likewise, every B<rwreceiver> that
communicates with the same B<rwsender> must have a unique identifier.
Ideally, the identifier should provide some information about where
the B<rwsender> or B<rwreceiver> program is running and what sort of
data it is transferring.

=head1 OPTIONS

Option names may be abbreviated if the abbreviation is unique or is an
exact match for an option.  A parameter to an option may be specified
as B<--arg>=I<param> or B<--arg> I<param>, though the first form is
required for options that take optional parameters.

The following set of switches are required:

=over 4

=item B<--identifier>=I<IDENT>

Use the name I<IDENT> when establishing a connection with an
B<rwreceiver> process.  The identifier should contain only printable,
non-whitespace characters; the following characters are illegal: colon
(C<:>), slash (C</> and C<\>), period (C<.>), and comma (C<,>).

=item B<--mode>=I<MODE>

Specify how the connection between B<rwsender> and B<rwreceiver>(s)
should be established.  When I<MODE> is B<server>, B<rwsender> will
listen for connections from B<rwreceiver> clients; when I<MODE> is
B<client>, B<rwsender> will attempt to connect to B<rwreceiver>
servers.

=item B<--incoming-directory>=I<DIR>

Watch the directory I<DIR> for files to transfer.  B<rwsender> ignores
any files in this directory that are empty or whose names begin with a
dot (C<.>).  In addition, new files will only be considered when their
size is constant for one polling-interval after they are first
noticed.

=item B<--processing-directory>=I<DIR>

Use I<DIR> as a location to cache files until they are successfully
transferred.

=item B<--error-directory>=I<DIR>

Move a file that is rejected by an B<rwreceiver> (for example, because
it has a duplicate filename) to the subdirectory I<IDENT> of I<DIR>,
where I<IDENT> is the identifier of the B<rwreceiver> that rejected
the file.

=back

When running in B<server> mode, the following switches are required:

=over 4

=item B<--server-port>=B<[>I<HOST>B<:]>I<PORT>

Listen for incoming B<rwreceiver> client connections on I<PORT> as
I<HOST>.  If I<HOST> is omitted, B<rwsender> will listen on any
address.  I<HOST> may be name or an IP address; when I<HOST> is an
IPv6 address, enclose it in square brackets.

=item B<--client-ident>=I<IDENT>

Allow connections from an B<rwreceiver> client whose identifier is
I<IDENT>.  This switch may be repeated to allow multiple B<rwreceiver>
clients to connect.

=back

When running in B<client> mode, the following switch is required:

=over 4

=item B<--server-address>=I<IDENT>:I<HOST>:I<PORT>

Attempt to connect to the B<rwreceiver> server listening to port
number I<PORT> on the machine I<HOST>.  The connection will be dropped
unless the B<rwreceiver> identifies itself as I<IDENT>.  This switch
may be repeated to connect to multiple B<rwreceiver> servers.  I<HOST>
may be a name or an IP address; when I<HOST> is an IPv6 address, it
must be enclosed in brackets.

=back

When SiLK is built with the GnuTLS (Transport Layer Security) library,
the following switches are available.  Using these switches allows
B<rwsender> and B<rwreceiver> to use an encrypted/authenticated
channel for their communication.  Use GnuTLS's B<certtool(1)> program
to create the PEM (Privacy Enhanced Mail) file.

=over 4

=item B<--tls-ca>=I<PEM_FILE>

Sets the Certificate Authority file to the given I<PEM_FILE> file,
thereby enabling encryption using TLS.  This switch must be used in
conjunction with either the B<--tls-pkcs12> option, or the
B<--tls-cert> and the B<--tls-key> options.

=item B<--tls-cert>=I<PEM_FILE>

Sets B<rwsender>'s encryption certificate for TLS to the given
I<PEM_FILE> file.  This switch must be used in conjunction with the
B<--tls-ca> and B<--tls-key> options.

=item B<--tls-key>=I<PEM_FILE>

Sets B<rwsender>'s encryption key for TLS to the given I<PEM_FILE>.
This switch must be used in conjunction with the B<--tls-ca> and
B<--tls-cert> options.

=item B<--tls-pkcs12>=I<DER_FILE>

Sets B<rwsender>'s encryption certificate and key for TLS to the given
I<DER_FILE>.  This switch must be used in conjunction with the
B<--tls-ca> option.  B<rwsender> will use the value in the
RWSENDER_TLS_PASSWORD environment variable to decrypt the PKCS#12
file.  If this variable is not set, B<rwsender> assumes the password
is the empty string.

=back

One of the following logging switches is required:

=over 4

=item B<--log-destination>=I<DESTINATION>

Specify the destination where logging messages are written.  When
I<DESTINATION> begins with a slash C</>, it is treated as a file
system path and all log messages are written to that file; there is no
log rotation.  When I<DESTINATION> does not begin with C</>, it must
be one of the following strings:

=over 4

=item C<none>

Messages are not written anywhere.

=item C<stdout>

Messages are written to the standard output.

=item C<stderr>

Messages are written to the standard error.

=item C<syslog>

Messages are written using the B<syslog(3)> facility.

=item C<both>

Messages are written to the syslog facility and to the standard error
(this option is not available on all platforms).

=back

=item B<--log-directory>=I<DIR_PATH>

Use I<DIR_PATH> as the directory where the log files are written.
I<DIR_PATH> must be a complete directory path.  The log files have the
form

 DIR_PATH/LOG_BASENAME-YYYYMMDD.log

where I<YYYYMMDD> is the current date and I<LOG_BASENAME> is the
application name or the value passed to the B<--log-basename> switch
when provided.  The log files are rotated: At midnight local time, a
new log is opened, the previous file is closed, and the command
specified by B<--log-post-rotate> is invoked on the previous day's log
file.  (Old log files are not removed by B<rwsender>; the
administrator should use another tool to remove them.)  When this
switch is provided, a process-ID file (PID) is also written in this
directory unless the B<--pidfile> switch is provided.

=item B<--log-pathname>=I<FILE_PATH>

Use I<FILE_PATH> as the complete path to the log file.  The log file
is not rotated.

=back

The following switches are optional:

=over 4

=item B<--local-directory>=[[I<IDENT>]:]I<DIR>

Create a duplicate of each incoming file in the directory I<DIR>.
This option may be specified multiple times to create multiple
duplicates.  The duplicate is made by a hard link to the file in the
processing-directory if possible, otherwise a complete copy is made
(see also B<--unique-local-copies>).  If I<IDENT> is specified,
filters can be used to determine which files get copied to I<DIR>.
See L<--filter|/"B<--filter>=I<IDENT>:I<REGEXP>"> for filter details.
When I<DIR> contains the colon character and no I<IDENT> is wanted, a
single colon can precede I<DIR> to designate an empty I<IDENT>.

=item B<--unique-local-copies>

Force the duplicate file created in each local-directory to be a
complete copy of the file in the processing-directory instead of a
hard link to the file.  Using hard links saves disk space and is
faster than making a complete copy; however, any modification-in-place
to one file affects all files.  This switch is ignored when the
B<--local-directory> switch is not provided.

=item B<--filter>=I<IDENT>:I<REGEXP>

Configure B<rwsender> to transfer files matching the regular
expression I<REGEXP> to the B<rwreceiver> whose identifier is
I<IDENT>, or to copy files to the local directory labeled as I<IDENT>.
This switch may be repeated.  When this switch is not provided, all
B<rwreceiver>s and local directories get all files.  When this switch
is provided, any files not matching a I<REGEXP> are left in the
incoming directory and are not transferred.

The regular expression must be a POSIX 1003.2 I<modern> or I<extended>
regular expressions, roughly akin to those used by B<egrep(1)>.
Documentation might be found in the B<regex(7)> or B<re_format(7)>
manual pages on your system.

=item B<--priority>=I<NUM>:I<REGEXP>

Set the priority of files that match I<REGEXP> to I<NUM>.  I<NUM> must
be an integer between 0 and 100 inclusive.  In the current version of
B<rwsender>, priorities 0 through 50 get grouped into a single I<low>
priority bin, and priorities 51 through 100 get grouped into a single
I<high> priority bin.  Files in the high priority bin are generally
be sent before files in the low priority bin.  The default priority of
a file is 50.  This switch can be repeated for multiple priorities.

=item B<--polling-interval>=I<NUM>

Configure B<rwsender> to check the incoming directory for new files
every I<NUM> seconds.  The default polling interval is 15 seconds.

=item B<--block-size>=I<NUM>

Specify the chunk size in bytes that B<rwsender> uses when sending
files to B<rwreceiver>s.  The default number of bytes is 8192; the
valid range is 256 to 65535.

=item B<--log-level>=I<LEVEL>

Set the severity of messages that will be logged.  The levels from
most severe to least are: C<emerg>, C<alert>, C<crit>, C<err>,
C<warning>, C<notice>, C<info>, C<debug>.  The default is C<info>.

=item B<--log-sysfacility>=I<NUMBER>

Set the facility that B<syslog(3)> uses for logging messages.  This
switch takes a number as an argument.  The default is a value that
corresponds to C<LOG_USER> on the system where B<rwsender> is running.
This switch produces an error unless B<--log-destination>=syslog is
specified.

=item B<--log-basename>=I<LOG_BASENAME>

Use I<LOG_BASENAME> in place of the application name in the name of
I<log> files in the log directory.  See the description of the
B<--log-directory> switch.  This switch does B<not> affect the name of
the process-ID file.

=item B<--log-post-rotate>=I<COMMAND>

Run I<COMMAND> on the previous day's log file after log rotation.
When this switch is not specified, the previous day's log file is
compressed with B<gzip(1)>.  When the switch is specified and
I<COMMAND> is the empty string, no action is taken on the log file.
Each occurrence of the string C<%s> in I<COMMAND> will be replaced
with the full path to the log file, and each occurrence of C<%%> will
be replaced with C<%>.  If any other character follows C<%>,
B<rwsender> exits with an error.  Specifying this switch without also
using B<--log-directory> is an error.

=item B<--pidfile>=I<FILE_PATH>

Set the complete path to the file in which B<rwsender> writes its
process ID (PID) when it is running as a daemon.  No PID file is
written when B<--no-daemon> is given.  When this switch is not
present, no PID file is written unless the B<--log-directory> switch
is specified, in which case the PID is written to
F<I<LOGPATH>/rwsender.pid>.

=item B<--no-chdir>

Do not change directory to the root directory.  When B<rwsender>
becomes a daemon process, it changes its current directory to the root
directory so as to avoid potentially running on a mounted file system.
Specifying B<--no-chdir> prevents this behavior, which may be useful
during debugging.  The application does not change its directory when
B<--no-daemon> is given.

=item B<--no-daemon>

Force B<rwsender> to run in the foreground---it does not become a
daemon process.  This may be useful during debugging.

=item B<--help>

Print the available options and exit.

=item B<--version>

Print the version number and information about how SiLK was
configured, then exit the application.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item RWSENDER_TLS_PASSWORD

Specifies the password to use to decrypt the PKCS#12 file specified in
the B<--tls-pkcs12> switch.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rwreceiver(8)>, B<silk(7)> B<syslog(3)>, B<certtool(1)>,
B<egrep(1)>, B<gzip(1)>, B<regex(7)>, B<re_format(7)>,
I<SiLK Installation Handbook>

=head1 BUGS

An attempt should be made to use a unique name for each file put into
the incoming directory.  When a file is added to the incoming
directory that has the same name as a file in the processing
directory, the file added to the incoming directoy replaces the
existing file in the processing directory.

=cut

$SiLK: rwsender.pod 5f1d69707e38 2013-03-22 21:10:51Z mthomas $

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
End:
