=pod

=head1 NAME

B<ipfixDump> - Print contents of an IPFIX file as human-readable text

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 ipfixDump [--in FILE_NAME] [--out FILE_NAME]
           [--rfc5610] [--element-file FILE_NAME] [--yaf]
           [--templates] [--data] [--stats]
           [--hexdump[=LEN]]

 ipfixDump [--version]

 ipfixDump [--help]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<ipfixDump> is a tool to read an IPFIX file and print its contents as
human-readable ASCII to assist the user in analyzing the file.  B<ipfixDump>
prints all message headers, templates, data records, options templates, and
options records to the output, plus a one line summary of the file's content.

B<ipfixDump> supports IPFIX structured data in the form of basicLists,
subTemplateLists, and subTemplateMultiLists.

By default, B<ipfixDump> reads the IPFIX file from the standard input and
writes the text to the standard output.  To specify the input or output file's
location, use the B<--in> or B<--out> option, respectively.

B<ipfixDump> requires the input file to contain the IPFIX templates that
describe the data records within the file, and the template must appear before
the records that use it.  Any records that do not have a corresponding template
are ignored.

The default information model used by B<ipfixDump> includes only the standard
information elements defined by
L<IANA|https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipfix/ipfix.xhtml> and provided by
libfixbuf.  There are three ways to augment the set of elements:

=over 4

=item 1

The B<--rfc5610> option instructs B<ipfixDump> to watch the input for options
records that define private enterprise information elements (as defined by
L<RFC5610|https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5610.html>) and to add those elements
to the information model.

=item 2

The B<--element-file=I<FILE_NAME>> option tells B<ipfixDump> to parse the
contents of I<FILE_NAME> and add those information elements to the information
model.  The argument is an XML file whose schema is that used by IANA's L<XML
Information Element Registry|https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipfix/ipfix.xml>,
with the following additions:

=over 4

=item cert:enterpriseId

A number representing the Private Enterprise Number of the element

=item cert:reversible

A boolean value (C<true>, C<yes>, or C<1> for true; C<false>, C<no>, or C<0>
for false) that specifies whether the element may have a separate identity in a
reverse flow.

=back

The B<--element-file> option may be used multiple times to load multiple files,
and the loaded elements replace existing elements with the same identifier.

=item 3

The B<--yaf> option loads the CERT private enterprise information elements into
the information model.  These elements are used by the NetSA tools B<yaf(1)>,
B<pipeline(8)>, B<super_mediator(1)>, and B<rwsilk2ipfix(1)>.  This option is
implemented as a wrapper over the B<--element-file> option where the file name
is F<cert_ipfix.xml> and B<ipfixDump> checks several directories to attempt to
find this file, stopping once it finds the first file.  The list of
directories, in search order, is

=over 4

=item *

the directory F<../share/libfixbuf> relative to the directory containing the
application

=item *

the F<libfixbuf> subdirectory of the C<datadir> directory specified when
B<ipfixDump> was configured (defaults to F<$prefix/share>)

=item *

the F<share/libfixbuf> subdirectory installation folder for the GLib-2 library

=item *

the F<libfixbuf> subdirectory of the directories specified by the
$XDG_DATA_DIRS environment variable, or F</usr/local/share> and
F</usr/share/libfixbuf> when that variable is empty

=back

B<ipfixDump> exits with an error if it is unable to find the F<cert_ipfix.xml>
file.  See L<https://tools.netsa.cert.org/cert-ipfix-registry/> for additional
information about this file.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The following options are available for B<ipfixDump>:

=over 4

=item B<--in> I<FILE_NAME>

Sets the input file name to I<FILE_NAME>.  When the option is not specified,
B<ipfixDump> reads from the standard input or exits with an error when the
standard input is a terminal.  B<ipfixDump> reads from the standard input if
I<FILE_NAME> is 'C<->'.

=item B<--out> I<FILE_NAME>

Sets the output file name to I<FILE_NAME>.  If I<FILE_NAME> exists, it is
overwritten.  The string 'C<->' may be used to write to standard output (the
default).

=item B<--rfc5610>

Tells B<ipfixDump> to scan the IPFIX input file for options records that define
private enterprise information elements and to add those elements to the
information model.

=item B<--element-file> I<FILE_NAME>

Loads the XML file I<FILE_NAME> and incorporates information element
information found in it.  The format of the file is described above.  The
option may be used multiple times to load multiple files, and later elements
replace existing elements when they have the same identifier.

=item B<--yaf>

Searches for a file named F<cert_ipfix.xml> in several locations and loads that
file as if it was an argument to B<--element-file>.  B<ipfixDump> exits with an
error if it is unable to find the F<cert_ipfix.xml> file.

=item B<--templates>

Suppresses the printing of records, causing the output to contain only message
headers, templates, and a summary line.

=item B<--data>

Suppresses the printing of templates, causing the output to contain only
message headers, records, and a summary line.

=item B<--stats>

Suppresses the printing of all message headers, templates, and records.  The
output consists of the number of messages, templates, and records present in
the input, and a two-column list showing template IDs found in the input and a
count of the number of records that used that template.

=item B<--hexdump>

For data record elements whose type is octetArray, prints each octet as a
2-digit hexadecimal value with a no separator between the values.  The length
of the element precedes the hexadecimal output.  B<ipfixDump> uses this display
for octetArray elements that are variable length or whose length is greater
than eight.  Without this option, only the length of the octetArray elements
are printed.  Note that fixed-width octetArray elements whose length is less
than or equal to eight are always printed as a decimal number regardless of
this option.

=item B<--hexdump=I<LEN>>

When the optional parameter I<LEN> is provided to B<--hexdump>, only the first
I<LEN> octets of the value are printed.  If I<LEN> is zero, only the length of
octetArray values is printed.  A I<LEN> that is negative or larger than 65535
is treated as the maximum, 65535.

=item B<--version>

Prints version and copyright information to standard error and exits.

=item B<--help>

Prints a brief usage message to the standard output and exits.

=back

=head1 Examples

In the following examples, the dollar sign ("$") represents the shell
prompt.  The text after the dollar sign represents the command line.

=over 1

 $ ipfixDump --in - --out -

 $ ipfixDump --in /data/ipfix.ipfix --out /data/text.txt --yaf

=back

=head1 Known Issues

Bug reports may be sent directly to the Network Situational Awareness team at
E<lt>netsa-help@cert.orgE<gt>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Emily Sarneso and the CERT Network Situational Awareness Group Engineering
Team, E<lt>http://www.cert.org/netsaE<gt>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<yaf(1)>, B<yafscii(1)>, B<yafdpi(1)>, B<super_mediator(1)>, B<pipeline(8)>,
B<rwsilk2ipfix(1)>, L<https://tools.netsa.cert.org/cert-ipfix-registry/>,
L<https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipfix/ipfix.xhtml>

=cut

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
fill-column:79
End:
