=pod

=head1 NAME

B<rwfileinfo> - Print information about a SiLK file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  rwfileinfo [--fields=FIELDS] [--summary] [--no-titles]
        [--site-config-file=FILENAME]
        FILE [ FILE ... ]

  rwfileinfo --help

  rwfileinfo --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<rwfileinfo> prints information about a SiLK file.  The information
that may be printed is:

=over 4

=item 1

B<format>.  The output file format, a string and its hexadecimal
equivalent: C<FT_RWSPLIT(0x12)>, C<FT_RWFILTER(0x13)>, etc

=item 2

B<version>.  The version of the file, an integer.  As of SiLK 1.0, the
version of the file is distinct from the version of the records in the
file.

=item 3

B<byte-order>.  The byte-order (endian-ness) of the file, a string

=item 4

B<compression>.  The compression library used to compress the
data-section of the file, a string and its decimal equivalent
(C<none(0)>, C<lzo1x(2)>.  Does not include any external compression,
such as if the entire file has been compressed with B<gzip(1)>.

=item 5

B<header-length>.  The length of the header in bytes

=item 6

B<record-length>.  The length of a single record in bytes.  This will
be 1 if the records do not have a fixed size.

=item 7

B<count-records>.  The number of records in the file.  If the
record-size is 1, this value is the uncompressed size of the data
section of the file.

=item 8

B<file-size>.  The size of the file as it is on disk

=item 9

B<command-lines>.  The command(s) used to generate this file, for
tools that support writing that information to the header and for
formats that store that information.

=item 10

B<record-version>.  The version of the records contained in the file

=item 11

B<silk-version>.  The release of SiLK that wrote this file, e.g.,
C<1.0.0>.  This value is 0 for files written by releases of SiLK prior
to 1.0.

=item 12

B<packed-file-info>.  The timestamp, flowtype, and sensor for a file
in the SiLK data repository.

=item 13

B<probe-name>.  The probe information for files created by
B<flowcap(8)>

=item 14

B<annotations>.  The notes (annotations) that have been added to the
file with the B<--note-add> and B<--note-file-add> switches

=item 15

B<prefix-map>.  The mapname value for a prefix map file.  The C<v1:>
that precedes the mapname denotes the version of the prefix-map header
entry, and it is printed for completeness.

=item 16

B<ipset>.  The number and size of the nodes and leaves in an IPset
file.

=item 17

B<bag>.  The type and size of the key and counter in a Bag file.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

Option names may be abbreviated if the abbreviation is unique or is an
exact match for an option.  A parameter to an option may be specified
as B<--arg>=I<param> or B<--arg> I<param>, though the first form is
required for options that take optional parameters.

=over 4

=item B<--fields>=I<FIELDS>

Determines which information about the file is printed.  I<FIELDS> is
a list of integers representing fields to print.  The I<FIELDS> may be
a comma separated list of integers; a range may be specified by
separating the start and end of the range with a hyphen (C<->).  The
available fields are listed above.  Fields are always printed in the
order given above.  If the B<--fields> option is not given, all fields
are printed.

=item B<--summary>

Prints a summary that lists the number of files processed, the sizes
of those files, and the number of records contained in those files.

=item B<--no-titles>

Suppresses printing of the file name and field names; only the values
are printed, left justified and one per line.

=item B<--site-config-file>=I<FILENAME>

Read the SiLK site configuration from the named file I<FILENAME>.
When this switch is not provided, B<rwfileinfo> searches for the site
configuration file in the locations specified in the L</FILES>
section.

=item B<--help>

Print the available options and exit.

=item B<--version>

Print the version number and information about how SiLK was
configured, then exit the application.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

In the following examples, the dollar sign (C<$>) represents the shell
prompt.  The text after the dollar sign represents the command line.

=for comment
Lines have been wrapped for improved readability, and the back slash
(C<\>) is used to indicate a wrapped line.

Get information about the file F<tcp-data.rw>:

 $ rwfileinfo tcp-data.rw
 tcp-data.rw:
   format(id)          FT_RWGENERIC(0x16)
   version             16
   byte-order          littleEndian
   compression(id)     none(0)
   header-length       208
   record-length       52
   record-version      5
   silk-version        1.0.1
   count-records       7
   file-size           572
   command-lines
                    1  rwfilter --proto=6 --pass=tcp-data.rw ...
   annotations
                    1  This is some interesting TCP data


Return a single value which is the number of records in the file
F<tcp-data.rw>:

 $ rwfileinfo --no-titles --field=count-records tcp-data.rw
 7


=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item SILK_CONFIG_FILE

This environment variable is used as the value for the
B<--site-config-file> when that switch is not provided.

=item SILK_DATA_ROOTDIR

This environment variable specifies the root directory of data
repository.  As described in the L</FILES> section, B<rwfileinfo> may
use this environment variable when searching for the SiLK site
configuration file.

=item SILK_PATH

This environment variable gives the root of the install tree.  When
searching for configuration files, B<rwfileinfo> may use this
environment variable.  See the L</FILES> section for details.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<${SILK_CONFIG_FILE}>

=item F<${SILK_DATA_ROOTDIR}/silk.conf>

=item F<@SILK_DATA_ROOTDIR@/silk.conf>

=item F<${SILK_PATH}/share/silk/silk.conf>

=item F<${SILK_PATH}/share/silk.conf>

=item F<@prefix@/share/silk/silk.conf>

=item F<@prefix@/share/silk.conf>

Possible locations for the SiLK site configuration file which are
checked when the B<--site-config-file> switch is not provided.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rwfilter(1)>, B<flowcap(8)>, B<silk(7)>, B<gzip(1)>

=cut

$SiLK: rwfileinfo.pod 52dafbdb77e6 2014-06-23 21:51:53Z mthomas $

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
End:
