=pod

=head1 NAME

B<rwsetcat> - Print the IP addresses in a binary IPset file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  rwsetcat [--count-ips] [--print-statistics] [--print-ips]
        [--cidr-blocks | --cidr-blocks=0 | --cidr-blocks=1]
        [--network-structure | --network-structure=STRUCTURE]
        [--ip-ranges]
        [--ip-format=FORMAT] [--integer-ips] [--zero-pad-ips]
        [--no-columns] [--column-separator=C] [--no-final-delimiter]
        [{--delimited | --delimited=C}]
        [--print-filenames | --print-filenames=0 | --print-filenames=1]
        [--pager=PAGER_PROG] [SET_FILE...]

  rwsetcat --help

  rwsetcat --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

When run with no switches, B<rwsetcat> reads each IPset file given on
the command line and prints its constituent IP addresses to the
standard output.  When the input IPset contains IPv4 data, B<rwsetcat>
prints one IP address per line; when the IPset contains IPv6 data,
B<rwsetcat> prints the IPs as CIDR blocks.  If no file names are
listed on the command line, B<rwsetcat> will attempt to read an IPset
from the standard input.

B<rwsetcat> can produce additional information about IPset files, such
as the number of IPs they contain, the number of IPs at the /8, /16,
/24, and /27 levels, and the minimum and maximum IPs.

To create an IPset file from SiLK Flow records, use B<rwset(1)>.
B<rwsetbuild(1)> creates an IPset from textual input.  The
B<--coverset> switch on B<rwbagtool(1)> creates an IPset from a binary
SiLK Bag.

=head1 OPTIONS

Option names may be abbreviated if the abbreviation is unique or is an
exact match for an option.  A parameter to an option may be specified
as B<--arg>=I<param> or S<B<--arg> I<param>>, though the first form is
required for options that take optional parameters.

=over 4

=item B<--count-ips>

Print a count of the number of IP addresses in the IPset file.  This
switch disables the printing of the IP addresses in the IPset file.
See B<--print-ips> for more information.  When B<--count-ips> is
specified and more than one IPset file is provided, B<rwsetcat>
prepends the name of the input file and a colon to the IP address
count.  See the description of the B<--print-filenames> switch for
more information.

=item B<--print-statistics>

Print statistics about the IPset.  The statistics include the minimum
IP address, the maximum IP address, and, for each CIDR block of /8,
/16, /24, /27, and /32, the number of blocks occupied and what
percentage of coverage that represents.  This switch disables the
printing of the IP addresses in the IPset.  See B<--print-ips> for
more information.  When B<--print-statistics> is specified and more
than one IPset file is provided, B<rwsetcat> prints the name of the
input file, a colon, and a newline prior to printing the statistics.
See the description of the B<--print-filenames> switch for more
information.

=item B<--print-ips>

Force printing of the IP addresses, even when the B<--count-ips> or
B<--print-statistics> option is provided.

=item B<--cidr-blocks>

=item B<--cidr-blocks>=B<0>

=item B<--cidr-blocks>=B<1>

When an argument is not provided to the switch or when the argument is
1, print the IPs in the IPset file, grouping sequential IPs into the
largest possible CIDR block.  If the argument is 0, print the
individual IPs in the IPset file.  By default, B<rwsetcat> prints
individual IPs for IPv4 IPsets, and CIDR blocks for IPv6 IPsets.  See
also the B<--ip-ranges> switch.  This switch cannot be combined with
the B<--network-structure> switch.

=item B<--network-structure>

=item B<--network-structure>=I<STRUCTURE>

For each numeric value in I<STRUCTURE>, group the IPs in the IPset
into a netblock of that size and print the number of hosts and,
optionally, print the number of smaller, occupied netblocks that each
larger netblock contains.  When I<STRUCTURE> begins with C<v6:>, the
IPs in the IPset are treated as IPv6 addresses, and any IPv4 addresses
are mapped into the ::ffff:0:0/96 netblock.  Otherwise, the IPs are
treated as IPv4 addresses, and any IPv6 address outside the
::ffff:0:0/96 netblock is ignored.  Aside from the initial C<v6:> (or
C<v4:>, for consistency), I<STRUCTURE> has one of following forms:

=over 4

=item 1

I<NETBLOCK_LIST>B</>I<SUMMARY_LIST>.  Group IPs into the sizes
specified in either I<NETBLOCK_LIST> or I<SUMMARY_LIST>.  B<rwsetcat>
prints a row for each occupied netblock specified in I<NETBLOCK_LIST>,
where the row lists the base IP of the netblock, the number of hosts,
and the number of smaller, occupied netblocks having a size that
appears in either I<NETBLOCK_LIST> or I<SUMMARY_LIST>.  (The values in
I<SUMMARY_LIST> are only summarized; they are not printed.)

=item 2

I<NETBLOCK_LIST>B</>.  Similar to the first form, except all occupied
netblocks are printed, and there are no netblocks that are only
summarized.

=item 3

I<NETBLOCK_LIST>B<S>.  When the character C<S> appears anywhere in the
I<NETBLOCK_LIST>, B<rwsetcat> provides a default value for the
I<SUMMARY_LIST>.  That default is 8,16,24,27 for IPv4, and 48,64 for
IPv6.

=item 4

I<NETBLOCK_LIST>.  When neither C<S> nor C</> appear in I<STRUCTURE>,
the output does not include the number of smaller, occupied netblocks.

=item 5

Empty.  When I<STRUCTURE> is empty or only contains C<v6:> or C<v4:>,
the I<NETBLOCK_LIST> prints a single row for the total network (the /0
netblock) giving the number of hosts and the number of smaller,
occupied netblocks using the same default list specified in form 3.

=back

I<NETBLOCK_LIST> and I<SUMMARY_LIST> contain a comma separated list of
numbers between 0 (the total network) and the size for an individual
host (32 for IPv4 or 128 for IPv6).  The characters C<T> and C<H> may
be used as aliases for 0 and the host netblock, respectively.  In
addition, when parsing the lists as IPv4 netblocks, the characters
C<A>, C<B>, C<C>, and C<X> are supported as aliases for 8, 16, 24, and
27, respectively.  A comma is not required between adjacent letters.
The B<--network-structure> switch disables printing of the IPs in the
IPset file; specify the C<H> argument to the switch to print each
individual IP address.

=item B<--ip-ranges>

Cause the output to contain three pipe-delimited (B<|>) columns: the
first is the number of IPs in the contiguous range, the second is the
start of the range, and the final is the end of the range.  This
prints the IPset in the fewest number of lines.

=item B<--ip-format>=I<FORMAT>

Specify how IP addresses are printed.  When this switch is not
specified, the SILK_IP_FORMAT environment variable is checked for a
format.  If it is empty or contains an invalid format, IPs are printed
in the canonical format.  The I<FORMAT> is one of:

=over 4

=item canonical

Print IP addresses in their canonical form: dotted quad for IPv4
(C<127.0.0.1>) and hexadectet for IPv6 (C<2001:db8::1>).  Note that
IPv6 addresses in ::ffff:0:0/96 and some IPv6 addresses in ::/96 will
be printed as a mixture of IPv6 and IPv4.

=item zero-padded

Print IP addresses in their canonical form, but add zeros to the
output so it fully fills the width of column.  The addresses
C<127.0.0.1> and C<2001:db8::1> are printed as C<127.000.000.001> and
C<2001:0db8:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0001>, respectively.

=item decimal

Print IP addresses as integers in decimal format.  The addresses
C<127.0.0.1> and C<2001:db8::1> are printed as C<2130706433> and
C<42540766411282592856903984951653826561>, respectively.

=item hexadecimal

Print IP addresses as integers in hexadecimal format.  The addresses
C<127.0.0.1> and C<2001:db8::1> are printed as C<7f000001> and
C<20010db8000000000000000000000001>, respectively.

=item force-ipv6

Print all IP addresses in the canonical form for IPv6 without using
any IPv4 notation.  Any IPv4 address is mapped into the ::ffff:0:0/96
netblock.  The addresses C<127.0.0.1> and C<2001:db8::1> are printed
as C<::ffff:7f00:1> and C<2001:db8::1>, respectively.

=back

=item B<--integer-ips>

Print IP addresses as integers.  This switch is equivalent to
B<--ip-format=decimal>, it is deprecated as of SiLK 3.7.0, and it will
be removed in the SiLK 4.0 release.

=item B<--zero-pad-ips>

Print IP addresses as fully-expanded, zero-padded values in their
canonical form.  This switch is equivalent to
B<--ip-format=zero-padded>, it is deprecated as of SiLK 3.7.0, and it
will be removed in the SiLK 4.0 release.

=item B<--no-columns>

Disable fixed-width columnar output when printing the output from the
B<--network-structure> or B<--ip-ranges> switch.

=item B<--column-separator>=I<C>

Use specified character between columns produced by the
B<--network-structure> and B<--ip-ranges> switches.  This character is
also used after the final column when B<--ip-ranges> is specified.
When this switch is not specified, the default of 'B<|>' is used.

=item B<--no-final-delimiter>

Do not print the column separator after the final column in the output
produced by B<--ip-ranges>.  Normally a delimiter is printed.

=item B<--delimited>

=item B<--delimited>=I<C>

Run as if B<--no-columns> B<--no-final-delimiter> B<--column-sep>=I<C>
had been specified.  That is, disable fixed-width columnar output; if
character I<C> is provided, it is used as the delimiter between
columns instead of the default 'B<|>'.

=item B<--print-filenames>

=item B<--print-filenames>=B<0>

=item B<--print-filenames>=B<1>

If an argument is not provided to the switch or if the argument is 1,
print the name of the IPset file prior to printing information about
the IPset file regardless of the number of IPset files specified on
the command line or the type of information to be printed.  If the
switch is provided and its argument is 0, suppress printing the name
of the IPset file regardless of the number of IPset files or type of
information.  When the switch is not provided, B<rwsetcat>'s behavior
depends on the type of information to be printed and on the number of
input IPset files: If multiple IPset files are provided and
B<--count-ips> or B<--print-statistics> is given, B<rwsetcat> prints
the name of a file, a colon (B<:>), a newline (unless B<--count-ips>
was specified), and the requested information; otherwise, B<rwsetcat>
does not print the file name.

=item B<--pager>=I<PAGER_PROG>

When output is to a terminal, invoke the program I<PAGER_PROG> to view
the output one screen full at a time.  This switch overrides the
SILK_PAGER environment variable, which in turn overrides the PAGER
variable.  If the value of the pager is determined to be the empty
string, no paging will be performed and all output will be printed to
the terminal.

=item B<--help>

Print the available options and exit.

=item B<--version>

Print the version number and information about how SiLK was
configured, then exit the application.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

In the following examples, the dollar sign (B<$>) represents the shell
prompt.  Some input lines are split over multiple lines in order to
improve readability, and a backslash (B<\>) is used to indicate such
lines.

By default, B<rwsetcat> prints the contents of an IPset.

 $ rwsetcat sample.set
 10.1.2.250
 10.1.2.251
 10.1.2.252
 10.1.2.253
 10.1.2.254
 10.1.2.255
 10.1.3.0
 10.1.3.1
 10.1.3.2
 10.1.3.3
 10.1.3.4

Use the B<--cidr-blocks> switch to print the contents in CIDR
notation.

 $ rwsetcat --cidr-blocks sample.set
 10.1.2.250/31
 10.1.2.252/30
 10.1.3.0/30
 10.1.3.4

B<rwsetcat> will read the IPset file from the standard input when no
file name is given on the command line.

 $ cat sample.set | rwsetcat --cidr-blocks
 10.1.2.250/31
 10.1.2.252/30
 10.1.3.0/30
 10.1.3.4

When multiple IPset files are specified on the command line,
B<rwsetcat> prints the contents of each file one after the other.

 $ rwsetcat --cidr-blocks sample.set sample.set
 10.1.2.250/31
 10.1.2.252/30
 10.1.3.0/30
 10.1.3.4
 10.1.2.250/31
 10.1.2.252/30
 10.1.3.0/30
 10.1.3.4

To print the union of multiple the IPset files, use B<rwsettool(1)> to
join the files and have B<rwsetcat> print the result.

 $ rwsettool --union sample.set sample.set | rwsetcat --cidr-blocks
 10.1.2.250/31
 10.1.2.252/30
 10.1.3.0/30
 10.1.3.4

To see contiguous IPs printed as ranges, use the B<--ip-ranges>
switch.  The columns contain the length of the range, its starting IP,
and its ending IP.

 $ rwsetcat --ip-ranges sample.set
         11|     10.1.2.250|       10.1.3.4|

Add the B<--ip-format=decimal> switch to see contiguous IPs printed as
ranges of integers.

 $ rwsetcat --ip-ranges --ip-format=decimal sample.set
         11| 167838458| 167838468|

Use the B<--delimited> switch to produce the same output as a list of
comma separated values.

 $ rwsetcat --ip-ranges --ip-format=decimal --delimited=, sample.set
 11,167838458,167838468

The UNIX B<cut(1)> tool can be used to remove the number of IPs in the
range, so that the output only contains the starting and ending IPs.

 $ rwsetcat --ip-ranges --ip-format=decimal --delimited=, sample.set \
     | cut -d"," -f2,3
 167838458,167838468

The B<--count-ips> switch will print the number IPs in the IPset.

 $ rwsetcat --count-ips sample.set
 11

When counting the IPs in multiple IPset files, B<rwsetcat> prepends
the file name and a colon to the count.  (The C<-> argument causes
B<rwsetcat> to read the standard input in addition to the named file.)

 $ cat sample.set | rwsetcat --count-ips sample.set -
 sample.set:11
 -:11

Provide an argument of B<0> to B<--print-filenames> to suppress
printing of the input IPset file name.

 $ cat sample.set \
     | rwsetcat --count-ips --print-filenames=0 sample.set -
 11
 11

Use the B<--print-filenames> switch to force B<rwsetcat> to print the
file name when only one IPset is given.

 $ rwsetcat --count-ips --print-filenames sample.set
 sample.set:11

The B<--print-filenames> switch also causes B<rwsetcat> to print the
file name when it normally would not.

 $ rwsetcat --ip-ranges --ip-format=decimal --print-filenames sample.set
 sample.set:
         11| 167838458| 167838468|

To see the contents of the IPset and get a count of IPs, use
multiple options.

 $ rwsetcat --count-ips --cidr-blocks sample.set
 11
 10.1.2.250/31
 10.1.2.252/30
 10.1.3.0/30
 10.1.3.4

For text-based sorting, use the B<--ip-format=zero-padded> switch to
force three digits per octet.

 $ rwsetcat --ip-format=zero-padded --cidr-blocks sample.set
 010.001.002.250/31
 010.001.002.252/30
 010.001.003.000/30
 010.001.003.004

For numerical sorting, print the IPs as integers.

 $ rwsetcat --ip-format=decimal sample.set
 167838458
 167838459
 167838460
 167838461
 167838462
 167838463
 167838464
 167838465
 167838466
 167838467
 167838468

Use B<--print-statistics> to get a summary of the IPset file.

 $ rwsetcat --print-statistics --print-filenames sample.set
 sample.set:
 Network Summary
         minimumIP = 10.1.2.250
         maximumIP = 10.1.3.4
                 11 hosts (/32s),    0.000000% of 2^32
                  1 occupied /8,     0.390625% of 2^8
                  1 occupied /16,    0.001526% of 2^16
                  2 occupied /24s,   0.000012% of 2^24
                  2 occupied /27s,   0.000001% of 2^27

The B<--network-structure> switch "rolls-up" the IPs into larger blocks.

 $ rwsetcat --network-structure=TABCXS sample.set
         10.1.2.224/27     | 6 hosts
       10.1.2.0/24         | 6 hosts in 1 /27
         10.1.3.0/27       | 5 hosts
       10.1.3.0/24         | 5 hosts in 1 /27
     10.1.0.0/16           | 11 hosts in 2 /24s and 2 /27s
   10.0.0.0/8              | 11 hosts in 1 /16, 2 /24s, and 2 /27s
 TOTAL                     | 11 hosts in 1 /8, 1 /16, 2 /24s, and 2 /27s

You may specify arbitrary blocks for the B<--network-structure>
switch.

 $ rwsetcat --network-structure=23,24 sample.set
   10.1.2.0/24       | 6
   10.1.3.0/24       | 5
 10.1.2.0/23         | 11

 $ rwsetcat --network=23,24/24 sample.set
   10.1.2.0/24       | 6 hosts
   10.1.3.0/24       | 5 hosts
 10.1.2.0/23         | 11 hosts in 2 /24s

 $ rwsetcat --network=T,23/24 sample.set
   10.1.2.0/23         | 11 hosts in 2 /24s
 TOTAL                 | 11 hosts in 1 /23 and 2 /24s

To see the IPs generated by B<rwset(1)> without creating an
intermediate IPset file, have B<rwset> send its output to the standard
output, and have B<rwsetcat> read from the standard input.

  $ rwfilter ... --pass=stdout | rwset --sip=stdout | rwsetcat
  192.168.1.1
  192.168.1.2

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item SILK_IP_FORMAT

This environment variable is used as the value for B<--ip-format> when
that switch is not provided.  I<Since SiLK 3.11.0.>

=item SILK_PAGER

When set to a non-empty string, B<rwsetcat> automatically invokes this
program to display its output a screen at a time.  If set to an empty
string, B<rwsetcat> does not automatically page its output.

=item PAGER

When set and SILK_PAGER is not set, B<rwsetcat> automatically invokes
this program to display its output a screen at a time.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rwset(1)>, B<rwsetbuild(1)>, B<rwsettool(1)>, B<rwsetmember(1)>,
B<rwbagtool(1)>, B<silk(7)>, B<cut(1)>

=cut

$SiLK: rwsetcat.pod 093f18894c79 2015-09-08 20:02:01Z mthomas $

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
End:
